---
layout: post
title:  "Principal Component Analysis and Interest Rate Modeling"
date:   2023-06-03 00:41:00 +0100
categories: machine_learning
---

1. Introduction
1.1 Yield Curve
A yield curve is a line plot of bond interest rates of the same credit quality, having different maturities. The yield curve has two dimensions to it:

It depicts investors' average market expectations on the performance of future short-term bonds.
The term premium - When the yield curve is upward sloping, it shows investors' confidence in the market as they are optimistic about receiving better returns in long-term bonds. In instances where the curve is downward sloping, investors expect tough times like a recession ahead. The yield curve could also be flat depicting no change in short-term and long-term rates.
These features of the yield curve can be modeled using principal components.

1.2 Value at Risk (VaR)
In this subsection, we only cover a small portion of VaR that will be useful to a later topic.

VaR is a useful metric to measure market risk on portfolio performance. VaR can be thought of as the largest possible loss we can incur for a given confidence interval and time period. VaR is a numerical value that distinguishes the tail (loss) of a distribution from the rest of the distribution.

An individual position-level VaR is calculated by multiplying the position volatility (standard deviation) of return, the portfolio total value, the absolute of proportion and the  z−
 score of our chosen confidence interval.

Z−
 score is used since we assume that our returns follow a normal distribution. For example, the  z−
 score of a one-tailed  99%
  VaR can be read in the normal table as equal to  2.32635
 .

In this lesson we will focus on portfolio-level VaR, which is calculated as:
Portfolio Var=Portfolio Volatility×Portfolio Total Value×z-score of confidence interval
 
where the portfolio volatility is the standard deviation of the returns in our portfolio.

2. Principal Component Analysis
Principal component analysis can be used to handle risk arising from data where variables are highly correlated. In this approach, we consider the historical data describing the market variables' movement and define factors that will explain the movements.

We will consider yield data with maturities of 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, 5 years, 7 years, 10 years, 20 years, and 30 years.

1.1 Loading Packages
We start by loading helper packages that will help us achieve our tasks.

{% highlight python %}

# Load libraries
# Global Libraries
# Disable the warnings
import warnings
from datetime import datetime

import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import pandas_datareader.data as web
import scipy as sp

# Plotting
import seaborn as sns
from matplotlib import pyplot
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler

warnings.filterwarnings("ignore")

from sklearn.decomposition import PCA

{% endhighlight %}